# TeachingTrustApp
Response to Questions
1. What is one thing you learned while completing this task?  
	I learned that I could specify the colClass when reading in a csv file.  When I initially read in the data, it stored all of the data as factors.  Converting the student data from factors to numeric values was causing the values to change.  I knew from previous work that going from factor to numeric required a few intermediate steps, but as I read through StackOverflow I saw that one way to approach this problem was to just specify how you read in the csv.  
2.  How did you identify you needed to learn this and how did you fill this gap in your knowledge?
I was getting a lot of results where the numerator was larger than the denominator for a given student demographic group.  I knew that this didn’t make sense, and at first I thought that I had been given a datasheet with a ton of terrible data just to see what I would do.  I wrote some code to check and see if the numerator was smaller than the denominator, and if it wasn’t, to drop that data and create a list to serve as a sort of error log for further exploration.  Then I went back and looked at the original data file, and realized that the original data had perfectly reasonable numerator/denominator combinations.  It took me several passes of stepping through my code line-by-line before I realized that my data was changing between the initial read of data from csv file and subsetting the data into the smaller dataframes I actually used.  Then I checked the structure of my dataframe and remembered from something I worked on previously that there was some weird trick to converting from factors to numeric values.  In order to fill this gap in my knowledge, I got onto Stack Overflow and started reading about different ways that people converted their dataframe structures, and tried to find one that would work for my entire dataframe rather than having to go through column by column.  
3.  60 – 90 minutes was a reasonable amount of time to do this task.  I completed it while supervising students, so it took me longer than that, as I was occasionally pulled away to assist a student who was completing an independent project.  Had I not spent a ridiculously long amount of time trying to find an elegant way to convert from factor to numeric, this would have taken me 90 minutes or less.  But this is an issue I face frequently when I’m working in R, so this seemed like a good opportunity to figure out a better way to do it.
Data Wrangling Process and Results
I used R to analyze the provided STAAR testing data.  After loading the data into R, I took the following data cleaning steps:
•	Removed all decimal values and replaced them with NA
•	Removed all negative values and replaced them with NA
•	Converted all student counts to numeric structures (I read in the file as columns of characters so that the counts could be easily converted to numeric values rather than converting from factors to numeric, which is sort of a mess)
Then I created several four data frames using the subset function.  For all demographic variables, I observed that there were two columns of data for each demographic group, one with the final two numbers in their column name as “16”, and one where the final two numbers in their column name were “17”.  I assumed that the columns ending in “17” were the datapoints of interest.  The dataframe names and purposes are listed below:
•	df.approaching_num:  Dataframe of students approaching grade level for their work.  I pulled only student records that were indicated as the “numerator” for their campus.
•	df.approaching_den:  Dataframe of students approaching grade level for their work.  I pulled only student records that were indicated as the “denominator” for their campus.  
•	df.ready_num:  Dataframe of students ready for grade level work.  I pulled only student records that were indicated as the “numerator” for their campus.
•	df.ready_den:  Dataframe of students ready for grade level work.  I pulled only student records that were indicated as the “denominator” for their campus.  
For all missing data, I replaced the missing values with zeroes.  I decided to run a quick check to make sure that all numerators for a student group were smaller than the denominators for the same student group.  I created two lists, ListtoLookInto_Approaching and ListtoLookInto_Ready to record any columns where the numerators provided were larger than the denominators.  There weren’t any, but creating this type of list would have helped me with troubleshooting. 
I am a bit confused about this data as I expected the sum of students classified as approaching grade level and students on grade level would either sum to 100%, or to a value less than 100%.  This was not the case.  I may have misunderstood the data and what the meanings of the numerators and denominators were as they were provided.  I am very curious to know why my results did not sum to 100%. 
To calculate proportions, I simply divided the numerator by the denominator for each group of interest.  Since I kept all of the demographic groups intact when I created my smaller dataframes, this was a pretty straightforward process.   
In order to compare testing results by school classification, I subsetted the data again, this time sorting on school classification.  I then calculated proportions in the same manner as before.   
In order to create a plot that compared student reading scores by school type, I created a new dataframe, plotting, in Tidy format.  I used ggplot2 to generate a bar plot that allowed for side-by-side comparison of student test results at each school classification.  
 
